Sentence structure is SOV, specifically SIDV. There are particles for complicated sentences, though these can be omitted in some simpler constructions, such as **uhjara tuwa' aadonri tuwa'**, a special sentence form called the *be-being* structure.

## Be-Being Sentences

These copular sentences are used to compare two states or qualities by using the non-finite ***+u+a+*** word template after both a subject and object state, equating them. In the example, **uhjara tuwa' aadonri tuwa'**, being alone is equated to the state of being in danger, and the sentence means something like "Being alone and being in danger are the same thing" or more simply: "Being alone is dangerous."

## Verb Tenses
Mudoran has four verb tenses and three moods, all of which are formed by specific word templates.

### Non-Finite Verbs

The first tense in Mudoran is its single non-finite verb form, which can be equivalent to the *infinitive, gerund,* and *participles.* The non-finite generic verb can't take any mood, and is always formed with the ***+u+a+*** template. The meaning of the non-finite is often very context dependent, as it does not combine with any other templates.

> [!NOTE] Root & Template Alignment
> It is generally assumed that most words have a triliteral root like **tnr**, though some content words have biliteral or tetraliteral roots. In these cases, the alignment of first and last consonants can must align with the first and last <+> symbols which appear in the template. For example, **fn** could align into ***+u+a+*** as **funa** or **fuan** -- the choice will affect the final meaning based on the root and template combination.

There are four Nonfinite templates, depending on what sense of a normal root you want to turn into a verb. All four of the nonfinite templates begin with ***+u***, and have a different subsequent pattern. **Mudora** itself is a nonfinite verb which means *to originate* using the template ***+u+o+a*** using the root **mtr** "start, origin"

#### Nonfinite Verb Examples

+ **tuwa'** 1. to be, being
+ **hujar** 1. to be one, to be as one, to be together
+ **tunar** 1. to burn 2. to set, to solidify, to support 3. to empower, to enchant 4. to endanger, to risk
+ **nujar** 1. to flow, to wet 2. to freeze 3. to understand, to intuit 4. to be cautious, to observe, to protect
+ **furaʃ** 1. to strike with lightning, to electrify 2. to blow, to gust 3. to live, to grow 4. to be brave, to stand up, to challenge

## Descendants in NMH

An early list of Mudoran roots and possible descendants in NMH:

+ **tw'** -> *tairag*
+ **hj'** -> *hire*, *uniag*
+ **tnr** -> *dinera, eldin, faeuire*
+ **njr** -> *nairune, niatore, naimre*
+ **frʃ** -> *farore, faroreske, fire, fárie?, fëste, fure*

## Mudoran Words of the Day for 2023-Nov-02

- **stw** 1. bone, stick, sturdy, strike **NMH:** _stale, sale, striuke_
- **psf** 1. fear, unnatural, demon, monster **NMH:** _fose, poe, banshag_