Mudoran is the earliest constructible language in the HLS version of Hyrule, a language spoken between the Goddesses and Gods and the earliest inhabitants of the world of Hyrule.

The name **Mudoran** is an exonym, used by the later peoples of Hyrule to describe any historical language they could not easily understand, primarily for those with written forms which had been lost to the ages. The HLS has used records of the earliest known written languages to reconstruct the earliest possible pre-written language, and is calling it **Mudoran.** While we do not claim that no earlier forms could exist, this is the earliest we are creating, and we are placing it at the Time of Creation, with dialects of it being spoken until the time of Hylia and Demise.

**Mudoran** has **very strict** word order, SOV (SIDV), with particles separating and indicating the roles of clauses within a sentence. The language has a high tendency for subject-dropping, and also inverts the order of Direct Object and Verb when forming questions.

Mudoran is analysed as using non-concatenative morphology, specifically using a multi-literal root system with vowel templates. Words can be split broadly into the classes of **Essential Roots** which range from 2-4 consonants, and **Compound Roots** which combine 2 (or more) essential roots. Roots do not have an inherent word class, and have a broad reference to related ideas.

The names of the goddesses are represented in Mudoran as **tnr**, **njr**, and **frʃ**, and are Essential Roots: **tnr** represents *fire, earth, power, danger*, **njr** represents _water, ice, wisdom, caution_, and **frʃ** represents _lightning, wind, life, courage_.

**Mudoran** does not phonemically distinguish aspiration or voicing in its roots (though some vowel templates can cause these qualities), but does can distinguish vowels in several dimensions.

**Consonants:** m, n, p, t, k, q, ʔ, f, s, ʃ, x, h, ɹ, l, j, w
**Vowels:** a, i, u, o;

---
## Mudoran Words of the Day for 2023-Nov-01

- **aadonri** _aa+o++i_ + _tnr_ 1. dangerous, perilous
- *aa+o++i* 1. abstract state; long vowels add voicing to the next consonant if it isn't already voiced

- **uhjara** _u++a+a_ + _hjr_ 1. lone, alone
- ***u++a+a*** 1. physical state

- **tuwa'** _+u+a+_ + _tw'_ 1. to be
- ***+u+a+*** 1. copular verb, nonfinite verb

```gloss
\ex uhjara tuwa' aadonri tuwa'
\gla uhjara tuwaʔ aadonri tuwaʔ
\glb u.hʲa.ɹä tu.waʔ aːd.ɔn.ɹi tu.waʔ
\glc _alone to.be, dangerous to.be_
\ft To be alone is dangerous.
```

Long vowels tend to cause voicing to the next consonant if it isn't already voiced.

Diachronic note: In the primary Hylian language family descended from Mudoran, /hj/ clusters in words like **uhjara** tend to be interpreted as /hi/, while other language familes may interpret it as /ç/.